README.md, before:

# My Spotify Demo

This project is a local demonstration of a music recommendation system using Flask, FastAPI, SQLite, and a CSV dataset of Spotify-like tracks. The application allows users to register, log in, view tracks, listen to tracks, and get track recommendations based on their listening history.

## Project Structure

```
my_spotify_demo/
├── dataset.csv
├── init_db.py
├── db.sqlite
├── app.py
├── recommend_api.py
├── train_model.py
├── requirements.txt
└── templates/
    ├── base.html
    ├── index.html
    ├── register.html
    ├── login.html
    ├── tracks.html
    └── recommend.html
```

- **dataset.csv**: Contains the track metadata (Spotify-like columns).
- **init_db.py**: Script to create the SQLite schema and populate `db.sqlite`.
- **db.sqlite**: The local SQLite database file (generated after initialization).
- **app.py**: Main Flask application (routes for registration, login, track listing, etc.).
- **recommend_api.py**: FastAPI microservice for recommendation logic.
- **train_model.py**: Script to train a recommendation model.
- **requirements.txt**: List of required dependencies.
- **templates/**: HTML (Jinja2) templates rendered by Flask routes.

## Environment & Dependencies

1. Create a virtual environment (recommended).
2. Install packages (`Flask`, `FastAPI`, `Uvicorn`, `pandas`, `bcrypt`, etc.).
3. Record these in `requirements.txt`.

## Database Schema & Initialization (init_db.py)

### Tables

Create three tables:
1. **users**: user accounts (`user_id`, `username`, `password_hash`, etc.).
2. **listening_history**: logs user-track interactions.
3. **tracks**: stores Spotify-like attributes (`track_id`, `artists`, etc.).

### Script Outline

`init_db.py` should define:

- `create_tables(conn)`: 
  - Drops existing tables (optional).
  - Creates `users`, `listening_history`, `tracks`.
- `populate_tracks(conn, csv_path)`: 
  - Reads `dataset.csv` via pandas or Python `csv`.
  - Inserts rows into `tracks`.
- `main()`:
  - Connects to `db.sqlite`.
  - Calls `create_tables(conn)`.
  - Calls `populate_tracks(conn, 'dataset.csv')`.
  - Closes the connection.

Run it once to initialize and populate `db.sqlite`.

## Flask Application (app.py)

**Flask** will handle:
- User Registration
- User Login
- Track Listing
- “Listening” to tracks (record in `listening_history`)
- Invoking the FastAPI endpoint for recommendations

### Database Connection
- `get_db_connection()` returns a connection to `db.sqlite`.

### User Routes
- `register()`: displays a form, inserts a new user into `users` with a hashed password.
- `login()`: checks credentials, sets session `user_id`.
- `logout()`: clears the session data.

### Track Management
- `tracks()`: lists tracks (e.g., top 50 from the DB).
- `listen(track_id)`: inserts a record into `listening_history`.

### Recommendation
- `recommend()`: calls the FastAPI (`/recommend/<user_id>`) to fetch recommended tracks.

## FastAPI Microservice (recommend_api.py)

A small recommendation service:

- `get_db_connection()`: connects to the same `db.sqlite`.
- `recommend_for_user(user_id: int, k: int = 5)`: 
  - `GET /recommend/{user_id}` 
  - Checks user listening history. 
  - Returns a JSON list of track IDs (random or dummy logic for demonstration).

## Templates (HTML)

Use **Jinja2** to create:

- `base.html`: base layout with navigation.
- `index.html`: homepage with links to login/register.
- `register.html`: registration form.
- `login.html`: login form.
- `tracks.html`: lists tracks, each has a “Listen” link.
- `recommend.html`: displays recommended track IDs from FastAPI.

## Running the Demo

1. **Initialize the DB**: 
  ```
  python init_db.py
  ```
2. **Start FastAPI**: 
  ```
  uvicorn recommend_api:app --port 8000 --reload
  ```
3. **Start Flask**: 
  ```
  python app.py
  ```
  Flask runs at `http://127.0.0.1:5000`.
4. **Test Flow**:
  - Go to `http://127.0.0.1:5000`.
  - Register & Login.
  - View tracks, click “Listen” to record a play.
  - Click “Get Recommendations” to call the FastAPI service.

## Enhancements

- **Security**: Consider `Flask-Login`, stronger secrets, etc.
- **Real ML Model**: Replace dummy logic in `recommend_for_user` with collaborative filtering or content-based methods.
- **Partial Fit**: Update the model incrementally as new data arrives.
- **UI**: Improve the front end for a more polished user experience.

## Summary of Methods to Implement

**init_db.py**
- `create_tables(conn)`
- `populate_tracks(conn, csv_path)`
- `main()`

**app.py**
- `get_db_connection()`
- `register()`
- `login()`
- `logout()`
- `tracks()`
- `listen(track_id)`
- `recommend()`

**recommend_api.py**
- `get_db_connection()`
- `recommend_for_user(user_id, k=5)`

These steps will create a **local demo** showing how Flask can manage user sessions and track listing, while FastAPI handles recommendation requests, all using a `SQLite` database and a `dataset.csv` of Spotify-like tracks.

Commit message:

Continued work on `recommend_api.py` and `train_model.py` to better suit model to the dataset and regularly retrain as listening history and sentiment changes. Added `populate_users.py` to generate realistic listening history, visualized with `history.html`.

README.md, after:

# My Spotify Demo

This project is a local demonstration of a music recommendation system using Flask, FastAPI, SQLite, and a CSV dataset of Spotify-like tracks. The application allows users to register, log in, view tracks, listen to tracks, and get track recommendations based on their listening history.

## Project Structure

```
my_spotify_demo/
├── dataset.csv
├── init_db.py
├── db.sqlite
├── app.py
├── recommend_api.py
├── train_model.py
├── populate_users.py
├── requirements.txt
└── templates/
    ├── base.html
    ├── index.html
    ├── register.html
    ├── login.html
    ├── tracks.html
    └── recommend.html
```

- **dataset.csv**: Contains the track metadata (Spotify-like columns).
- **init_db.py**: Script to create the SQLite schema and populate `db.sqlite`.
- **db.sqlite**: The local SQLite database file (generated after initialization).
- **app.py**: Main Flask application (routes for registration, login, track listing, etc.).
- **recommend_api.py**: FastAPI microservice for recommendation logic.
- **train_model.py**: Script to train a recommendation model.
- **populate_users.py**: Script to populate the `users` and `listening_history` tables with dummy data.
- **requirements.txt**: List of required dependencies.
- **templates/**: HTML (Jinja2) templates rendered by Flask routes.

## Environment & Dependencies

1. Create a virtual environment (recommended).
2. Install packages (`Flask`, `FastAPI`, `Uvicorn`, `pandas`, `bcrypt`, etc.).
3. Record these in `requirements.txt`.

## Database Schema & Initialization (init_db.py)

### Tables

Create three tables:
1. **users**: user accounts (`user_id`, `username`, `password_hash`, etc.).
2. **listening_history**: logs user-track interactions.
3. **tracks**: stores Spotify-like attributes (`track_id`, `artists`, etc.).

### Script Outline

`init_db.py` should define:

- `create_tables(conn)`: 
  - Drops existing tables (optional).
  - Creates `users`, `listening_history`, `tracks`.
- `populate_tracks(conn, csv_path)`: 
  - Reads `dataset.csv` via pandas or Python `csv`.
  - Inserts rows into `tracks`.
- `main()`:
  - Connects to `db.sqlite`.
  - Calls `create_tables(conn)`.
  - Calls `populate_tracks(conn, 'dataset.csv')`.
  - Closes the connection.

Run it once to initialize and populate `db.sqlite`.

`populate_users.py` can be used to add dummy users and listening history. 
Here, we use the first slice of the Million Playlists Dataset (from Spotify) to create new users with realistic listening history to populate the `users` and `listening_history` tables.
The fake users are created using the `Faker` library.

## Flask Application (app.py)

**Flask** will handle:
- User Registration
- User Login
- Track Listing
- "Listening" to tracks (record in `listening_history`)
- Invoking the FastAPI endpoint for recommendations

### Database Connection
- `get_db_connection()` returns a connection to `db.sqlite`.

### User Routes
- `register()`: displays a form, inserts a new user into `users` with a hashed password.
- `login()`: checks credentials, sets session `user_id`.
- `logout()`: clears the session data.

### Track Management
- `tracks()`: lists tracks (e.g., top 50 from the DB).
- `listen(track_id)`: inserts a record into `listening_history`.

### Recommendation
- `recommend()`: calls the FastAPI (`/recommend/<user_id>`) to fetch recommended tracks.

## FastAPI Microservice (recommend_api.py)

A small recommendation service:

- `get_db_connection()`: connects to the same `db.sqlite`.
- `recommend_for_user(user_id: int, k: int = 5)`: 
  - `GET /recommend/{user_id}` 
  - Checks user listening history. 
  - Returns a JSON list of track IDs (random or dummy logic for demonstration).

## Templates (HTML)

Use **Jinja2** to create:

- `base.html`: base layout with navigation.
- `index.html`: homepage with links to login/register.
- `register.html`: registration form.
- `login.html`: login form.
- `tracks.html`: lists tracks, each has a "Listen" link.
- `history.html`: displays user listening history.
- `recommend.html`: displays recommended track IDs from FastAPI.

## Running the Demo

1. **Initialize the DB**: 
  ```
  python init_db.py
  ```
2. **Start FastAPI**: 
  ```
  uvicorn recommend_api:app --port 8000 --reload
  ```
3. **Start Flask**: 
  ```
  python app.py
  ```
  Flask runs at `http://127.0.0.1:5000`.
4. **Test Flow**:
  - Go to `http://127.0.0.1:5000`.
  - Register & Login.
  - View tracks, click "Listen" to record a play.
  - Click "Get Recommendations" to call the FastAPI service.

## Enhancements

- **Security**: Consider `Flask-Login`, stronger secrets, etc.
- **Real ML Model**: Replace dummy logic in `recommend_for_user` with collaborative filtering or content-based methods.
- **Partial Fit**: Update the model incrementally as new data arrives.
- **UI**: Improve the front end for a more polished user experience.

## Summary of Methods to Implement

**init_db.py**
- `create_tables(conn)`
- `populate_tracks(conn, csv_path)`
- `main()`

**app.py**
- `get_db_connection()`
- `register()`
- `login()`
- `logout()`
- `tracks()`
- `listen(track_id)`
- `recommend()`

**recommend_api.py**
- `get_db_connection()`
- `recommend_for_user(user_id, k=5)`

These steps will create a **local demo** showing how Flask can manage user sessions and track listing, while FastAPI handles recommendation requests, all using a `SQLite` database and a `dataset.csv` of Spotify-like tracks.
